#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass gecco-article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme pslatex
\graphics default
\float_placement h+tb
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize a4paper
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 2
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Genetic Programming: An Analysis of Random Number Generators for a Hardware
 Implementation of Genetic Programming using FPGAs and Handel-C
\layout Author

Author
\newline 
Address1,
\newline 
Address2
\newline 
email@domain +00 000 000 000
\layout Abstract

This paper analyses the effect of using different random number generators
 (RNG) in a hardware implementation of Genetic Programming using Field Programma
ble Gate Arrays.
 Hardware systems have typically used RNGs based on Logical Feedback Shift
 Registers or Cellular Automata.
 Different configurations of these generators are evaluated as well as using
 a source of true random numbers and a standard multiply/add generator.
 We show that using a more sophisticated generator than a simple LFSR slightly
 improves the performance of GP.
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

Previous work [?] described an implementation of Genetic Programming using
 Field Programmable Arrays and a high level language to hardware compilation
 system called Handel-C.
 Subsequent work [?] described a pipelined implementation that improved
 the performance and demonstrated that the technique could be used to solve
 the artificial ant problem .
 In both cases the work concentrated on the implementation issues and increasing
 the clock speed of the implementation, but put to one side the performance
 of the system with respect to it's ability to solve GP problems.
 Now that the raw throughput issues have been addressed it is time to look
 at how good the hardware implementation performs with respect to GP, in
 particular the effectiveness of the Random Number Generator (RNG) used.
 
\layout Standard

A comment often made about Genetic Programming and other stochastic search
 methods is that a good random number generator is needed.
 The evidence so far is that the quality of the RNG is probably not as important
 as often stated.
 Nevertheless, it is important to consider the effect of design decisions
 and to investigate alternatives where practicable.
\layout Standard

In the hardware implementation of GP, the random number generator is implemented
 using a Logical Feedback Shift Register (LFSR) which has a number of known
 weaknesses.
 This suggests that other random number generators should be investigated.
 This paper begins with a brief description of the Handel-C language and
 the design of a hardware GP system.
 This is followed by a review of previous work on random number generation
 that has been implemented in hardware.
 We then present an analysis of the pseudo random number generator used
 in the original design, and investigate other random number generators.
 We finish with a discussion of the results and draw some conclusions.
\layout Section

A Hardware Implementation of GP using FPGAs
\layout Standard

A detailed review of previous work using FPGAs in Evolutionary Computing
 can be found in [?].
\layout Subsection

Description of Handel-C
\layout Standard

Handel-C is a high level language that is at the heart of a hardware compilation
 system known as Celoxica DK1 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Celoxica:website}

\end_inset 

 which is designed to compile programs written in a C-like high level language
 into synchronous hardware.
 The output from Handel-C is a file that is used to create the configuration
 data for the FPGA.
 A description of the process used by Handel-C to transform a high level
 language into hardware and examples of the hardware generated can be found
 in 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{page:1996}

\end_inset 

.
 Handel-C has its roots in CSP and Occam.
\layout Standard

The C-like syntax makes the tool appealing to software engineers with little
 or no experience of hardware.
 They can quickly translate a software algorithm into hardware, without
 having to learn about VHDL or FPGAs in detail.
 Examples of how Handel-C may be exploited can be found in work by Page
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{page:video:1997}

\end_inset 

 where a number of video algorithms were implemented using just an FPGA,
 and in work by Sulik 
\shape italic 
et al
\shape default 
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{sulik:2000}

\end_inset 

 that describes how a Reduced Instruction Set Computer core was designed
 in 48 hours.
\layout Standard

One of the advantages of using hardware is the ability to exploit parallelism
 directly.
 Because standard C is a sequential language Handel-C has additional constructs
 to support the parallelization of code, and to allow fine control over
 what hardware is generated.
\layout Standard

Since Handel-C targets hardware, there are some programming restrictions
 when compared to using ISO-C, and these need to be considered when designing
 code that can be compiled by Handel-C.
 Some of these restrictions particularly affect the building of a GP system.
 Firstly, there is no stack available, so recursive functions cannot be
 directly supported by the language.
 Secondly, there is a severe limit to the size of memory that can be implemented
 using standard logic cells on an FPGA because implementing memory is expensive
 in terms of silicon real estate.
 However, some FPGAs have internal RAM that can be used by Handel-C which
 is supported by the 
\family typewriter 
ram
\family default 
 storage specifier.
\layout Standard

Handel-C supports two targets.
 The first is a simulator that allows development and testing of code without
 the need to use any hardware.
 This is supported by a debugger and other tools.
 The second target is the synthesis of a netlist for input to FPGA place
 and route tools.
 This allows the design to be translated into configuration data for particular
 chips.
 Analysis of cycle counts is available from the simulator, and an estimate
 of the final gate count is generated by the Handel-C compiler.
\layout Subsection

Target Hardware
\layout Standard

The target hardware for this work is a Celoxica RC1000 FPGA development
 board fitted with a Xilinx XCV2000E Virtex-E FPGA having 43,200 logic cells
 and 655,360 bits of block ram, a PCI bridge that communicates between the
 RC1000 board and the host computer's PCI bus, and four banks of Static
 Random Access Memory (SRAM).
 Logic circuits isolate the FPGA from the SRAM, allowing both the host CPU
 and the FPGA to access the SRAM, though not concurrently.
 
\layout Subsection

Program Representation
\layout Standard

The lack of a stack in Handel-C means that a standard tree based representation
 is difficult to implement because recursion cannot be handled by the language.
 An alternative to a tree representation is a linear representation which
 has been used by others to solve some hard GP problems 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Nordin:1995:tcp}

\end_inset 

.
 Using a linear representation, a program consists of a sequence of words
 which are decoded by the problem specific fitness function.
 
\layout Section

Previous Work on Pseudo Random Numbers for Genetic Programming and Hardware
\layout Standard

This section reviews the types of random number generators that have been
 used by hardware implementations of GA, GP and other applications of hardware
 to probabilistic algorithms.
\layout Standard

Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR) or Tauseworth generators have been
 used by Maruyama et al 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{maruyama:19}

\end_inset 

.
 In their paper they referred to the generator as a m-sequence, or maximal
 sequence.
 This means that the generator of length 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 generates 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2^{n}-1 \)
\end_inset 

 numbers.
 Graham 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Graham:96}

\end_inset 

 implemented a single cycle LFSR.
\layout Standard

An interesting hybrid was used Tommiska and Vuori 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{tommiska:1996}

\end_inset 

 where three coupled LFSRs were used to provide a random sequence.
 An interesting feature of this work is that the RNG was combined with a
 source of noise.
 The amplified noise from a diode was fed into an analogue to digital converter,
 and the resulting digital values were used to seed the RNG, and also added
 to the LFSR at intervals.
\layout Standard

The manufacturers of FPGAs provide example designs of LFSRs to be used as
 random sequence generators.
 For example Xilinx 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{xilinx:rng:2001}

\end_inset 

, and Altera 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{altera:2001}

\end_inset 

 provide HDL code for LFSRs.
\layout Standard

Aporntewan 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{aporntewan:2001}

\end_inset 

 used a one dimensional 2-state Cellular Automata (CA).
 Shackleford et al 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{shackleford:2001}

\end_inset 

 implemented a CA based on the work by Wolfram 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Wolfram:1986}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

In the field of GP, the behavior of GP and GAs has been investigated using
 different RNGs.
 Meysenburg and Foster considered the effect of different RNGs on GAs 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{meysenburg:1999:RGPR}

\end_inset 

 and GP 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{meysenburg:1999:RGQGP}

\end_inset 

.
 Their conclusions were that there were no statistically significant differences
 in the performance of GA or GP when different RNGs were used.
\layout Section

Analysis of Random Number Generators for a Hardware GP System
\layout Subsection

Performance measurements
\layout Standard

The performance of the various RNGs in this paper was tested using three
 methods.
 Firstly, the Diehard test suite maintained by Marsaglia 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{diehard:2001}

\end_inset 

 was used to gauge the general performance of the RNG.
 This suite consists of up to 15 tests that are modeled on applications
 of random numbers.
 All the RNGs considered in this paper were implemented in ISO-C and were
 submitted to all 15 tests.
 The test method for Diehard is similar to that described in Meysenburg
 and Foster 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{meysenburg:1999:RGQGP}

\end_inset 

.
 Each RNG was used to generate a binary file of about 10\SpecialChar ~
MiB
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

The notation MiB indicates 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2^{20} \)
\end_inset 

 (1048576) bytes.
 This paper uses the binary prefixes from the NIST.
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{NIST:2001}

\end_inset 


\end_float 
.
 Each Diehard test produces one or more 
\begin_inset Formula \( p \)
\end_inset 

-values.
 A 
\begin_inset Formula \( p \)
\end_inset 

-value can be considered good, bad, or suspect.
 Meysenburg used a scheme by Johnson 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Johnson:1996}

\end_inset 

 which assigns a score to a 
\begin_inset Formula \( p \)
\end_inset 

-value as follows.
 If 
\begin_inset Formula \( p\geq 0.998 \)
\end_inset 

 then it is classified as bad.
 If 
\begin_inset Formula \( 0.95\leq p<0.998 \)
\end_inset 

 then it is classified as suspect.
 All other 
\begin_inset Formula \( p \)
\end_inset 

-values are classified as good.
 Every bad 
\begin_inset Formula \( p \)
\end_inset 

-value scores 4, every suspect 
\begin_inset Formula \( p \)
\end_inset 

-value scores 2 and good 
\begin_inset Formula \( p \)
\end_inset 

-values score zero.
 For each RNG, the scores for each test were summed, and the total for each
 RNG is the sum of all the test scores for that RNG.
 Using this scheme, high scores indicate a poor RNG and low scores indicate
 a good RNG.
 The results for each test are given in Appendix A.
\layout Standard

Each RNG was then implemented using Handel-C and used in the artificial
 ant problem with the Santa Fe trail.
 The problem was run 500 times, and the number of correct programs that
 appeared was recorded.
 This is used as a measure of how good the RNG performs.
 In all cases, the population size is 1024, the maximum program length is
 31 and all experiments were run for 32 generations.
 
\layout Standard

Each RNG was also implemented as a stand alone application for an FPGA using
 Handel-C, and the number of slices used and the maximum attainable clock
 frequency was recorded.
 This gives a measure of the hardware resources needed to implement the
 RNG, and also an indication of the logic depth required.
\layout Section

Random Number Generator Implementations
\layout Subsection

LFSR RNG
\layout Standard

Figure 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{fig:LFSR}

\end_inset 

 shows a schematic of the LFSR used in this work.
 
\layout Standard

\begin_float fig 
\layout Standard
\align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 140 56
file images/lfsr.eps
height 1 2
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{fig:LFSR}

\end_inset 

Logical Feedback Shift Register Random Number Generator
\end_float 
\layout Standard

The random number is read from the highest bits as required.
 The obvious weakness of this type of RNG is that sequential values fail
 the serial test described by Knuth 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Knuth:vol2}

\end_inset 

.
 At any time step 
\begin_inset Formula \( t \)
\end_inset 

 there is a 50% probability that the value at time 
\begin_inset Formula \( t+1 \)
\end_inset 

 can be predicted.
 If for an LFSR of length 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 at time 
\begin_inset Formula \( t \)
\end_inset 

 the value is 
\begin_inset Formula \( v \)
\end_inset 

, then at time 
\begin_inset Formula \( t+1 \)
\end_inset 

 the value will be 
\begin_inset Formula \( v/2 \)
\end_inset 

 or 
\begin_inset Formula \( v/2+2^{n-1} \)
\end_inset 

.
 This is shown in Figure 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{fig:LFSR pairs test}

\end_inset 

 where pairs of values 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{t} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{t+1} \)
\end_inset 

 are plotted.
 
\layout Standard

\begin_float fig 
\layout Standard
\align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 161 113
file images/lfsrrng_1.eps
height 1 4
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{fig:LFSR pairs test}

\end_inset 

Serial test of a simple LFSR RNG
\end_float 
\layout Standard

It can be seen that for any value 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{t} \)
\end_inset 

 there are only two possible values of 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{t+1} \)
\end_inset 

.
 Though the random number generator runs in parallel with the main GP machine,
 it is possible to access sequential values when creating an initial program,
 or when choosing crossover points.
 There is then a possibility of a potentially degrading bias by using such
 an RNG.
 
\layout Subsection

Multiple LFSRs
\layout Standard

One method of obtaining better serial test results for the LFSR of length
 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 is to allow the LFSR to run for 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 cycles before reading another number.
 Since this would limit the rate at which random numbers could be generated
 in the present design it is not explored any further.
 However, an equivalent result can be obtained by implementing 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 LFSRs of length 
\begin_inset Formula \( m \)
\end_inset 

 and using a single bit from each LFSR at each time step.
 This can also be done using a single long LFSR of 
\begin_inset Formula \( n\times m \)
\end_inset 

 bits, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Stiliadis:1995}

\end_inset 

 effectively implementing 
\begin_inset Formula \( n \)
\end_inset 

 parallel LFSRs.
 However, implementing a long shift register in a Xilinx Virtex FPGA is
 not efficient because the look up tables can implement a 16 bit shift register
 very easily, but longer shift registers require more extensive routing
 resources.
 
\layout Standard

The effect of using a better RNG was investigated by implementing 32 16
 bit LFSR machines that run in parallel, and initializing each LFSR to a
 different value.
 Bit32 from each LFSR is used to construct a 32 bit random number.
 The serial test result is shown in Figure 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{fig:16 LFSR RNG pairs test}

\end_inset 

, which shows the serial test result for 32 LFSRs is better than the single
 LFSR.
 This generator is referred to as the 32LFSR.
\layout Standard

\begin_float fig 
\layout Standard
\align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 161 113
file images/lfsrrng_skip.eps
height 1 4
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{fig:16 LFSR RNG pairs test}

\end_inset 

Serial test for an RNG using 16 parallel LFSRs
\end_float 
\layout Subsection

Cellular Automata RNG
\layout Standard

Another popular RNG for hardware implementations is based on Cellular Automata
 (CA).
 A one-dimensional (1D) CA consists of a string of cells.
 Each cell has two neighbors - left and right, or in some literature west
 and east respectively.
 At each time step, the value of any cell 
\begin_inset Formula \( c \)
\end_inset 

 is given by a rule.
 For this implementation, rule 30 is used, which states that for any cell
 
\begin_inset Formula \( c \)
\end_inset 

 at time 
\begin_inset Formula \( t \)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{t+1}=((west_{t} \)
\end_inset 

+
\begin_inset Formula \( c_{t})\oplus east_{t}) \)
\end_inset 

, where 
\begin_inset Formula \( \oplus  \)
\end_inset 

 denotes the exclusive OR function.
 In practice the CA is implemented using a single 32 bit word, and for cell
 0, its right-hand neighbor is cell 31, and similarly for cell 31 its left
 hand neighbor is cell 0.
 Figure 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{fig:CA pairs test}

\end_inset 

 shows the result of running this RNG using the serial test.
 As in the simple LFSR RNG there is a distinct pattern to the numbers, but
 for most values of 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{t} \)
\end_inset 

 there are several possible values for 
\begin_inset Formula \( v_{t+1} \)
\end_inset 

.
 This generator is referred to as 1DCA.
\layout Standard

\begin_float fig 
\layout Standard
\align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 161 113
file images/lcarng_1.eps
height 1 4
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{fig:CA pairs test}

\end_inset 

Serial test for a 1DCA RNG
\end_float 
\layout Subsection

Multiple CA generators
\layout Standard

As in the case of the LFSR RNG, if several CAs are combined, the results
 should be much better.
 For this test, 32 CAs were implemented, and by taking one bit from each
 CA, a 32 bit random number can be generated.
 The serial test appears to be much more random, as shown in Figure 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{fig:CA 16}

\end_inset 

.
 Each CA is initialized with a different pattern.
 This generator is referred to as the 32CA
\begin_float fig 
\layout Standard
\align center 

\begin_inset Figure size 161 113
file images/lcarng_skip.eps
height 1 4
flags 9

\end_inset 


\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{fig:CA 16}

\end_inset 

Serial test for a 32CA
\end_float 
\layout Subsection

Standard C RNGs
\layout Standard

Another frequently used RNG is the linear congruential (LC) generator that
 is often found in implementations of the standard C library.
 The general equation for these is 
\begin_inset Formula \( I_{j+1}=aI_{j}+c\mid m\mid  \)
\end_inset 

, where 
\begin_inset Formula \( a,c \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( m \)
\end_inset 

 are constants chosen to produce a maximal length RNG.
 However, as pointed out by many authors (eg:
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{press86numerical}

\end_inset 

) these generators are not good.
 Another factor against such a generator for implementing in hardware is
 that it requires one addition, one multiplication, and one modulus operator,
 which in Handel-C would consume a large amount of silicon and because of
 the deep logic produced, would be slow.
 An alternative given by 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{press86numerical}

\end_inset 

 avoids the modulus operator, and is called the Even Quicker Generator (EQG).
 It is claimed that this is about as good as any 32 bit linear congruential
 generator.
 Its equation is 
\begin_inset Formula \( I_{j+1}=aI_{j}+c \)
\end_inset 

, and values for 
\begin_inset Formula \( a=1664525 \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( c=1013904223 \)
\end_inset 

 are suggested.
 
\layout Standard

As a sanity check that the experimental method of ranking the RNGs using
 Diehard was the same as that used by Meysenburg, the generator known as
 ``the mother of all generators'' was also implemented and run against the
 Diehard suite.
 This is a multiply with carry generator and is described by Marsaglia 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{marsaglia:1994}

\end_inset 

.
 It was not implemented in the hardware GP system.
\layout Subsection

Non random sequences
\layout Standard

Until now we have considered pseudo random sequences.
 These are sequences where it is hard to guess the next number in a sequence.
 As an experiment, a further set of runs were performed with an obviously
 non-number generator.
 For this a sequential generator that output the sequence 
\begin_inset Formula \( n,n+1,n+2,\ldots  \)
\end_inset 

 was used.
 Rather surprisingly this also worked to produce 100% correct programs,
 though substantially fewer than the other generators achieved.
 
\layout Subsection

Truly Random Sequences
\layout Standard

All the RNGs considered so far are not true random sequences, relying on
 the manipulation of objects of finite size, and so fail one or more of
 the Diehard battery of tests.
 So a set of random numbers was obtained from a source generated by using
 the atmospheric noise captured by a radio receiver
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{randomorg:2002}

\end_inset 

.
 Each GP run for the ant problem needs about half a million random numbers,
 so a block of 10\SpecialChar ~
MiB was downloaded from www.random.org, and a randomly selected
 2\SpecialChar ~
MiB block was transferred to one of the SRAM on the FPGA system using
 DMA.
 The FPGA read this block sequentially to get its random numbers.
\layout Standard

As reported by 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{tommiska:1996}

\end_inset 

, RNGs based on sampling a source of noise are often slow, so they are not
 always applicable to high speed systems.
\layout Section

Experimental Results
\layout Standard

The results from running the Diehard tests are given in Appendix A and are
 summarized in Table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{table:Summary of Diehard}

\end_inset 

.
 This shows the total results for each test and ranks them.
\layout Standard

\begin_float tab 
\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{table:Summary of Diehard}

\end_inset 

Summary results of running the Diehard tests on the RNGS.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="2" rows="8" columns="3">
<features rotate="false" islongtable="false" endhead="0" endfirsthead="0" endfoot="0" endlastfoot="0">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="" special="">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="" special="">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="" special="">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

RNG
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Rank
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Score
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Mother
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

20
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

True
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

22
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32LFSR
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

162
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

EQG
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

288
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32CA
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

640
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

CA
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

676
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

LFSR
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

756
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\end_float 
\layout Standard

The number of correct programs that were produced by each random number
 generator was recorded and is shown in Table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{table:Correct program counts}

\end_inset 

.
 The results are ranked and shows how each RNG performed.
 The table also shows the slice count for the RNG implemented using Handel-C
 and the maximum frequency as reported by the place and route tools.
 The slice count and frequency for the true RNG assumes that the source
 of random numbers is supplied by an external device to the FPGA, and that
 the FPGA simply needs to read the value from a port and write it to a register.
\layout Standard

\begin_float tab 
\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{table:Correct program counts}

\end_inset 

Summary of GP performance for all random number generators tested from 500
 runs
\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="2" rows="8" columns="6">
<features rotate="false" islongtable="false" endhead="0" endfirsthead="0" endfoot="0" endlastfoot="0">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1.2cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="0.7cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="0.7cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

RNG
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Rank
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Correct
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

% Correct
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Slice
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Clock rate 
\begin_inset Formula \( F_{max} \)
\end_inset 

 (MHz)
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32CA
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

190
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

38.0%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

284
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

105
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

True
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

188
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

37.6%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

>200
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32LFSR
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

185
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

37.0%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

130
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

134
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

EQG
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

182
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

36.4%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

288
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

42
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ID CA
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

182
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

36.4%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

22
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

125
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

LFSR
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

159
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

31.8%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

18
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

188
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Sequential
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

59
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

11.8%
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

21
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

155
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\end_float 
\layout Section

Discussion
\layout Standard

The score obtained by the mother RNG was close to that obtained by Meysenburg,
 the difference being explained by the fact that Meysenburg used the average
 of 32 runs, while the work described here used only a single run.
 It is likely that using 32 different seeds, that different scores would
 be observed.
 This confirms that the experimental method used for ranking the RNGs using
 Diehard is comparable.
\layout Standard

Despite the apparently serious deficiencies found in both the simple LFSR
 used in the original implementation and the simple one dimensional CA random
 number generator, the overall effect of implementing a more sophisticated
 RNG on the overall GP performance appeared to be small.
 This result generally agrees with the work by Meysenburg and Foster 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{meysenburg:1999:RGQGP}

\end_inset 

, with the exception that they did not consider a single-cycle LFSR.
 The single-cycle LFSR performs the least well of the RNGs considered in
 this paper.
\layout Standard

Even more surprising was the emergence of programs when a non-random sequence
 was used.
 Clearly a non-random sequence does not allow GP to operate as efficiently
 in terms of producing 100% correct programs, presumably because of the
 failure to explore some areas of the search space.
\layout Standard

Despite the small differences in performance, from the results we can say
 that using a different RNG from the single LFSR would improve the performance
 of the hardware GP implementation by a measurable and therefore useful
 amount, and that an RNG based on multiple LFSRs or multiple CAs would be
 a better choice for a hardware GP system.
 The use of a truly random number source did not appear to improve performance
 over the 1DCA, 32CA and 32LFSR RNGs.
 This provides more evidence countering the notion that GP needs a very
 high quality RNG.
 
\layout Standard

When looking at the FPGA slice counts and maximum clock rates, it is clear
 that the 32LFSR uses about half the FPGA resources that the 32CA does,
 and exhibits a smaller delay than the 32CA.
 As predicted, the EQG uses the most FPGA resources and has very deep logic,
 meaning that it can only run at a much slower rate than any of the other
 generators.
 The EQG RNG could be re-implemented in the FPGA using pipelines to achieve
 much higher clock rate, but since it performed no better than the 32CA
 and 32LFSR, this was not investigated any further.
\layout Section

Further work and Conclusions
\layout Standard

Random numbers are used in several functions within a GP system: Initial
 population creation, selection and crossover point selection.
 In common with all reported GP systems, the same RNG is been used for all
 these functions within a run.
 From a practical point of view it would appear that there is little point
 is using more than one type of RNG for different functions, but from the
 result using a sequence a question arises about the role that random sequences
 play as opposed to sequences that simply enumerate a set of numbers.
 From this it follows that different stages in GP may use random number
 sequences in different ways, and that using an enumeration may be helpful
 when investigating the dynamics of GP.
\layout Standard

The conclusion from this investigation is that for the hardware GP system,
 the simple LFSR used in the original design can be improved upon by using
 a generator based on multiple LFSRs, multiple CAs, or if available, a high
 speed source of true random numbers.
 
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \BibTeX[plain]{handelc}

\end_inset 


\layout Section*


\latex latex 

\backslash 
newpage 
\latex default 

\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{Appendix A}

\end_inset 

Appendix A
\layout Subsection*

Results of the Diehard Tests
\layout Standard

This appendix contains the results of running the Diehard tests for all
 RNGs in this paper.
 Max score represents the case where an RNG fails all the tests.
\begin_float tab 
\layout Caption


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{table:Diehard results}

\end_inset 

Diehard test results for all RNGs considered in this paper.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="2" rows="17" columns="9">
<features rotate="false" islongtable="false" endhead="0" endfirsthead="0" endfoot="0" endlastfoot="0">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="4cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<column alignment="left" valignment="top" leftline="false" rightline="false" width="1cm" special="">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Test
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Max score
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

LFSR
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

EQG
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32LFSR
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

IDCA
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32CA
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

True
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="left" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Mother
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Birthday
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

36
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

36
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Overlapping permutation
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Binary Rank 32x32
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Binary Rank 6x
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

104
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

104
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

40
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

140
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

70
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Bitstream
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

80
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

80
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

80
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

80
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Overlapping pairs tests
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

328
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

328
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

188
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

94
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

328
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

320
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Count the ones (stream)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Count the ones (specific)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

100
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

100
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

42
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

30
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

100
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

100
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Parking Lot
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

44
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Minimum Distance
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3D spheres
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

84
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Squeeze
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Overlapping Sums
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

44
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

44
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="false" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Runs
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

16
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

16
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

16
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Craps
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

12
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="false" bottomline="true" newpage="false">
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Total
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

876
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

756
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

288
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

162
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

676
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="false" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

640
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

22
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell multicolumn="0" alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" bottomline="false" leftline="true" rightline="true" rotate="false" usebox="none" width="" special="">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

20
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\end_float 
\the_end
