#LyX 1.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 220
\textclass essex
\options oneside
\language british
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 2
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Standard


\begin_inset ERT
status Open

\layout Standard

\backslash 
begin{singlespace}
\end_inset 

First of all, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to my supervisor
 Professor Riccardo Poli for agreeing to supervise me and for all the help
 and guidance he gave me throughout the work.
 I would like to thank him especially for always answering my questions
 promptly and for reviewing and commenting on many drafts and papers, often
 at short notice.
\layout Standard

A special note of thanks goes to Dr.
 Stuart Wray, a former colleague from Marconi, for help and encouragement,
 for thoroughly reviewing many papers and drafts and for many thought provoking
 discussions about this work.
 Stuart also planted the idea of Meta-GP which is described in Chapter\SpecialChar ~
2.
 I would also like to thank Icarus Sparry, again a former colleague from
 Marconi, for his valuable comments.
\layout Standard

This work was sponsored by Marconi plc whom I would like to thank for their
 support and for generously allowing me time to undertake this work.
 In particular, I would like to thank Stuart Barratt who initially introduced
 Handel-C to me and made it possible for me to have access to Handel-C software
 while at Marconi.
 He also lent me the RC1000 development board which was used for the experimenta
l work.
 I would also like to thank Steffan Westcott who provided useful guidance
 in the use of Handel-C and for some perceptive comments and suggestions
 on early drafts of my first paper.
\layout Standard

Celoxica have been generous in their support of this work, in particular
 Graham McKenzie and Roger Gook for making a copy of Handel-C available
 to me after I had left Marconi.
 Xilinx Inc.
 supplied the Alliance Tool set which was used for place and route.
\layout Standard

I would also like to thank the GP community for their help, especially the
 anonymous reviewers of papers I have submitted who have made constructive
 comments and who have helped me to improve my published papers.
 I would also like to thank Bill Langdon for maintaining that most valuable
 resource -- the GP bibliography.
\layout Standard

Finally, I would like to thank my wife Lynette and daughter Nicole for their
 forbearance during the past 3 years while I carried out this work.
 Without their understanding and encouragement, and for not complaining
 when I disappeared into the study to spend many hours at my computers,
 it would have been impossible to complete this thesis.
 I would also like to thank Lynette for proof reading several papers and
 parts of this thesis.
\layout Section*
\added_space_top vfill 
Trademarks
\layout Standard

Many of the designations used by manufacturers to distinguish their products
 are claimed as trademarks.
 Where those designations appear in this thesis, and the author was aware
 of a trademark claim, the designations are printed in initial capitals
 or in all capitals.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset ERT
status Open

\layout Standard

\backslash 
end{singlespace}
\end_inset 


\the_end
