#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass essex
\begin_preamble
\input{shortheader.tex}
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize a4paper
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 2
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Standard

This chapter discusses the work described in the preceding chapters.
\layout Standard

From chapter 2 it is clear that effort is an issue.
\layout Standard

Previous use of FPGAs in the field of evolutionary computation.
\layout Standard

Handel-C as an implementation language for software engineers.
\layout Standard

Proof of concept demonstrated the viability of the approach, but had seceral
 areas for improvement.
\layout Standard

Pipelining and use of external memory improved performance.
\layout Standard

Analysis of crossover operator using program length distributions allowed
 us to explore other crossover operators and measure their behaviour.
\layout Standard

Analysis of alternative random number generators improved the performance
 still further.
\layout Standard

Economics of using this approach.
\layout Enumerate

Time required to design and implement in handle-c.
 
\layout Enumerate

Use of C langauge for proving the algorithm.
\layout Enumerate

Time for compilation
\layout Enumerate

Time for place and route
\layout Enumerate

Time needed to iteratively improve the design performance.
\layout Enumerate

Cost of hardware
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

high end pc
\layout Enumerate

fpga evaluation boards
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Cost of software
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Linux for trandtional GP
\layout Enumerate

Cost of Handel-C - note cost to universities is very low.
 Differentiate between research and industrial application.
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Time to run
\begin_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Notional cost of running an extended experiment.
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Relate effort to cost - a measure of cost for a correct soltuon?
\layout Standard

Reasons to consider this approach.
\layout Enumerate

Real-time constraints that would rule out tranditional approaches.
\layout Enumerate

hard problems for whichtraditional approaches would not be feasible - high
 order boolean problems?
\layout Standard

Another dimension to the meta-GP model proposed in chapter 2.
 The iteration of the design in Handel-C to minimise delays and clock cycles.
\the_end
