



<fontfamily><param>Times</param><bigger><bigger>Dear GECCO-2002
Participant,


This message confirms your reservation at PACE University housing for
the dates specified below. Please review all the information carefully,
including room type, arrival and departure dates and roommate selection
(if applicable). Please notify me immediately of any changes or
discrepancies. <bold>We will not be able to make any changes or
cancellations to your reservation after June 14, 2002</bold>.


NAME:Peter Martin

ARRIVAL DATE: July 9

DEPARTURE DATE: July 14

RATE:  single 

TOTAL NIGHTS: 5

ROOMMATE(if applicable):  

 

PACE University is located near the Brooklyn Bridge in the heart of the
civic and financial center of New York City. Contact information for
PACE is as follows:


1 Pace Plaza

New York, NY 10038

(212) 346-1200

Automated telephone directions: (212) 346-1133


Upon arrival at PACE University, please check in at the Auxiliary
Services Office located on the B-Level of One Pace Plaza. This part of
the campus is most easily accessed from the Spruce and William street
entrance. The phone number for the Auxiliary Services Office is (212)
346-1015. Check in / check out is available during the hours of 9:00 am
- 5:00 pm on weekdays and 9:00 am - 1:00 pm on weekends. Pace will be
conduct extended check in hours on July 8th ONLY. On July 8th, the
Auxiliary Services office will be open from 9:00 am to 11:00 pm for
check in. Please keep in mind that summer staffing at PACE University
is extremely limited. In order to guarantee that a staff person will be
available to check you in or out of PACE, please be sure that your
arrival and departure schedule coincides with the above mentioned
times.


<bold>DIRECTIONS TO PACE UNIVERSITY</bold>:


It is suggested that you <bold>do not </bold>attempt to take public
transportation from either JFK or LGA airports to PACE University,
especially if you will be arriving late or carrying substantial
luggage. Instead, it is recommended that you either take a cab (expect
to pay approximately $35-40 one way) to PACE or use the New York
Airport Service, a convenient and less expensive shuttle service which
provides transportation from both JFK and LGA airports to downtown
Manhattan and various other locations. Shuttles depart approximately
every half-hour from both airports, beginning at about 6:30 am and
running until 11:00 pm. Signs for the shuttle service are located
outside of baggage claim areas.  


Perhaps the least expensive, yet still convenient, option is to take
the New York Airport Service to Grand Central Station (approximately
$10.00 one way) and then take a cab from Grand Central to PACE
University (approximately $7.00 one way). It is slightly less expensive
if you reserve your shuttle trip on-line, though their website! For
more information, including schedules, sample fares and online
reservations, see:


http://www.nyairportservice.com/index.html


Getting from PACE University to the GECCO-2002 headquarters located at
the Roosevelt is generally safe and convenient via public
transportation. The closest subway stops to PACE University are Park
Place (#1 or #2 train) or Brooklyn Bridge/City Hall Park (#4 or #5
train). The Roosevelt Hotel is directly across the street from Grand
Central Station, which is on the same line as the #4 and #5 train or
one transfer from the #1 or #2 line<bold>. For up-to-date schedules,
fares and maps for New York City subway and buses</bold>, see:


<underline><color><param>0000,0000,00FF</param>http://www.mta.nyc.ny.us


</color></underline>Also, attached is an information sheet provided by
PACE University to help answer some of your questions concerning their
housing set-up, rules and helpful suggestions for out-of-town
travelers. 


Please feel free to contact me should you have any further questions. I
look forward to seeing you in New York!


Sincerely,


Elizabeth Ericson

Conference Coordinator       

  

  


</bigger></bigger></fontfamily>_________________________________________________

Elizabeth Ericson

Conference Coordinator

American Association for Artificial Intelligence 

445 Burgess Drive

Menlo Park, CA 94025

Tel: 650-328-3123 

Fax: 650-321-4457 

ericson@aaai.org

_________________________________________________ 
